---
layout: post
title: The basic variables you should focus to build muscles
permalink: basic-variables
---


To make your muscles grow you have to stimulate them adequately. But how
exactly can you generate an effective training stimulus? Is it better to
perform 50 repetitions in one go or 5 x 10 repetitions with a
short pause in between? How much weight on the bar is optimal? How long
should the pauses between sets are? Which exercises lead to the biggest
muscle gains?

These are the questions everyone interested in bodybuilding is
confronted with. Unfortunately, if you spend a few minutes on the
internet you can easily find someone who supports any possible position.
Someone will argue that 5 times 10 repetitions is the only way to make
real gains, while another self-proclaimed coach will argue that 50
repetitions without pauses lead to far better results. In fact, with a
little bit of practice it's quite easy to come up with a convincing
story that supports any given point you want to make.

For example, one popular argument is that you should do all repetitions
purposefully slow since this increases the time under tension which  at
least that's the idea  leads to more hypertrophy. On the other hand,
it's equally possible to argue that you should do your repetitions
explosively because this allows you to do more reps and lift more
weight. And everyone knows that more reps and a heavier load lead to
greater gains, right?

This can be extremely confusing for beginners. The only way out of
paradoxical situations like this are scientific studies. Well designed
scientific studies, appropriately interpreted, allow us to compare the
likelihoods that different hypothesis are correct. Of course, individual
factors can be extremely important and there is no absolute certainty in
science. Nevertheless, studies provide us with valuable data that help
us to decide which hypothesis has a higher probability of being correct.

With this in mind, we discuss in the following all basic handles that
are commonly used to write down workout plans. Most importantly, we talk
about their relative importance and about general recommendations that
can be deduced from scientific studies.

The following diagram summarizes our plan in this article:


{:.centered}
![](/images/variables.ong)

Before we start, here's a sort disclaimer.

*Currently there isn't enough convincing scientific data to answer all
questions conclusively. Weightlifting was historically not a very active
field of research. Only in the past few years more and more
well-designed studies have been conducted. But even in the absence of
perfect data, scientific studies may provide important hints. After all,
a well-designed study with small sample size is better than the
alternative of just making stuff up.*

*With that said, it's important to keep in mind that even advice based
on scientific evidence can be misleading. If you focus on enough markers
(e.g. hormonal responses) and use a sufficiently small sample size, you
can find evidence for any point you want to make.*[^15] *Thus in the
following I'll primarily focus on results that are supported by meta
studies*[^16] *and focus on the only marker we are really interested in,
muscle growth. You can find direct references to all the studies in the
margin and whenever the scientific data is not yet conclusive, this is
explicitly pointed out. Whenever possible I tried to include full
references in the margin. However, on some pages there simply isn't
enough space and thus I've only included abbreviations. You can then
find all missing information in the bibliography at the end of the
book.*

With that out of the way, let's dive in.

## Volume {#sec:volume}
------

One of the most important handles you can control if you're interested
in muscle growth is the training volume. In general, the
training volume encodes how much work in total is performed per week per
muscle group.

One aspect that can be quite confusing is that there are lots of
different ways to define training volume. Three popular definitions are

-   volume = number of sets x number of reps x load
    = volume load,

-   volume = number of sets x number of reps = total
    repetitions ,

-   volume = number of sets.

If you read other books or research papers make sure to always check
which definition of volume the authors use. Many seemingly paradoxical
statements can be resolved by noting that a different definition is
used.

Since we primarily care about muscle growth in this book, we will use
the third definition. The total number of (sufficiently hard) sets
correlates directly with hypertrophy, while the number of reps in each
set and the total load matter far less (if at
all).

As mentioned above, our primary goal during a workout is to generate a
sufficiently high training stimulus. During a heavy-load low-repetition
set, each repetition provides a lot of tension and stimulates all muscle
fibers at once. But during a low-load high-repetition set the same net
stimulus can be generated since fatigue builds up over time and
therefore eventually all muscle fibers are helping out.

Of course, the intensity has to be sufficiently high in each set for
them to be effective at all.[^17] You can't just lift an extremely light
weight two times and call this a set. Some common sense is in order. But
as long as each set is adequately hard, it's really the total number of
sets that counts the most.

Two examples may be helpful to illustrate this point.

-   The authors of a recent paper found that a 3 x 6 repetitions
    scheme produces comparable hypertrophy as a 3 x 15
    repetitions scheme (provided that in both schemes all sets are
    performed till failure). This demonstrates that the total number of
    repetitions is not a good indicator of hypertrophy.

-   The authors of another paper conclude that a \"high-load routine\"
    with a load that allows for at most 8-12 repetitions per set
    produces almost exactly the same hypertrophy as a \"low-load
    routine\" that consists of sets with a much lower load which allows
    for a maximum of 25-35 repetitions (provided that in both routines
    all sets are performed till failure). Although the volume load is
    much higher in the \"low-load routine\", the results are
    comparable.[^18] Therefore, volume load is not a good indicator of
    hypertrophy.

These example might give you the impression that variables like the rep
range or the rep scheme do not matter at all. But this is not true since
certain rep ranges and rep schemes are better suited to accumulate
volume simply because we are humans and not robots. For example, 5
light-load sets á 30 repetitions might be, in theory, just as effective
as 5 high-load sets á 8 repetitions. But the former rep scheme needs far
more time and is psychologically more demanding.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Before we move on and discuss the definition and role of workout
intensity, there is one more aspect of training volume that we need to
discuss.

While it is true that workout volume and hypertrophy are directly
correlated (\"more volume
equals more muscle gains\"), this relationship only holds up to a
certain point. More isn't always better.

If you add more and more sets to your workout routines, you will
eventually notice diminishing returns. If you move beyond
this point and add even more sets, your workout routine will become
counterproductive. With far
too many sets in your routine you will enter a state known as
\"overtraining\" and not make further progress.

Diagrammatically, the relationship between volume and progress roughly
looks like this:

![image](images/muscle/1.png){width="80%"}

The abbreviations in this diagram are defined as follows:[^19]

-   MV denotes the **maintenance volume**. This is the amount of
    training that you need to avoid loosing muscle gains.

-   MEV denotes the **minimum effective volume**. This is the minimum
    amount of training that you need to make measurable muscle gains.

-   MAV denotes the **maximum adaptive volume**. This is the amount of
    training that stimulates muscle growth maximally.

-   MRV denotes the **maximum recoverable volume**. This is the maximum
    amount of training you can still recover from.

Although this is completely unrealistic, let's assume for a moment that
you know perfectly which number of sets corresponds to each of these
landmark points for a given muscle group. What should you do in this
case?

There is no completely general answer since many factors play a role
here. For example, if you're short on time it's a perfectly valid
approach to use a minimum effective volume. But even if time is not an
issue it usually makes sense to choose a volume somewhere between your
MEV and MAV. Here's why.

First of all, in the real world you simply don't know exactly what your
MEV, MAV, and MRV is. There is always some uncertainty. Thus it makes
sense to err on the side of caution. Moreover, your MEV, MAV, and MRV
are not constant and depend on environmental factors. For example, if
you only sleep six hours a night, don't have full control over your diet
and a lot of stress because you're traveling, your MRV will be
substantially lower. Hence if you choose a volume that is too close to
your maximum recoverable volume it's easy to slide into overtraining
during such periods.

Thus, especially as a beginner it makes sense to start with a minimum
effective volume. Working with a minimum effective volume makes it far
easier to build a workout habit. Over time you can slowly start to
increase the volume to accelerate your progress. We will discuss this later in
more detail once we've discussed progression
systems in more general terms.

A sensible general recommendations is that for many beginners around 10
sets per muscle group and week seem to be optimal[^20]. For total
beginners, however, as few as four sets per week and muscle group can
already be sufficient to stimulate substantial gains[^21]. Negative
effects typically start to occur at around 20 sets per muscle
group[^22]. The exact numbers depend on your training level and many
other factors. After years of regular lifting it's possible to benefit
from far higher volumes (30 weekly sets per muscle
group). Another important factor is the training
frequency. If you train each muscle only once per week, doing more than
10 sets will be almost certainly counterproductive. But
if you split your total volume per muscle into two or more workout
sessions per week it's possible to benefit from a much higher number of
sets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In summary, the speed at which you build muscles depends on your
training volume. However, the dose-response relationship between volume
and hypertrophy only holds up to a certain point. If the volume is too
large, your workouts become counterproductive. A useful rule of thumb is
that the minimum effective volume for beginners is around 4 sets per
week and muscle group, and the maximal adaptive volume corresponds to
around ten (sufficiently hard) sets per week and muscle group .

Next, let's talk about how we can determine whether or not a set is
sufficiently hard.

## Intensity {#sec:intensity}
---------

The intensity of each set is an important variable if you want to
optimize for muscle growth. If a set isn't challenging, chances are high
that it will do nothing for you.

In the previous section, we've established that counting sets is a
sensible approach to quantify if you're doing enough total work.
Similarly, it makes sense to introduce a measure that allows us to
describe the intensity of a set in a quantitative way.

The two most popular measures of intensity are:

-   Percentage of One-Rep Max. This is an absolute measure of intensity
    that encodes how much weight you are lifting in a given set. For
    example, if the maximum weight you can bench press exactly one time
    is 100 kg, we call this your One-Rep Max. In this case, a set with
    70 kg would count as 70% of 1RM. In many workout plans the intensity
    of a set is prescribed in terms of such percentages. For instance: 8
    reps at 70% of 1RM.

-   Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE)[^23]. This is a relative measure
    of intensity that encodes how close you get to failure. For example,
    if you're able to perform a maximum of 12 repetitions using a given
    weight and you stop at 10 repetitions, we call this an 8 RPE set
    since you still have two repetitions in reserve. A set till failure
    (12 repetitions in this example) would be a 10 RPE set. Hence, by
    using the RPE measure we always only determine how close we want to
    get to failure and nothing else. Higher RPE means closer to failure
    and thus higher intensity. An analogous measure is Repetitions in
    Reverse (RIR). In the example above, you still have two repetitions
    in reserve and we therefore call this a 2 RIR set. The relationship
    between RPE and RIR is RPE = 10 - RIR.

      **RPE**   **Description**              **Reps in Reserve**
      --------- ---------------------------- ---------------------
      10        No additional rep possible   0
      9         Could do 1 more rep          1
      8         Could do 2 more reps         2
      7         Could do 3 more reps         3
      5-6       Could do 4 to 5 more reps    4-5
      1-4       Warm-Up                      too many to count

At first glance, it may seem as if the One-Rep Max measure is superior
because it's more objective. Especially for beginners it can be quite
hard to judge how many reps you have in reserve, while the One-Rep Max
can either be tested directly or calculated by performing an \"as many
reps as possible\" set. For example, if you're able to do a maximum of
12 repetitions with 70 kg on the bar you can calculate that your 1RM is
100 kg.[^24]

However, at a second glance the Percentage of One Rep Max measure turns
out to be far from objective. There are huge variations in how
challenging a set at a given percentage of their On-Rep Max is for
different people. For some people 8 repetitions at 70% of their 1RM is
the maximum they can do in a particular exercise, while others are able
to perform 20 repetitions at 70% of their 1RM without problems[^25].
Hence a prescription like 8 reps at 70% 1RM will be extremely
challenging for people in the former group but not challenging enough
for people in the second group.

In contrast, RPE comes much closer to what we would like to have as a
measure of intensity. A 9 RPE set will be equally challenging for
everyone because RPE is a relative scale. At the end of a 9 RPE set your
muscles will, by definition, close to failure and thus it will certainly
count as a high intensity set.[^26]

One downside of the RPE measure is that it requires some experience.
While after years of lifting it's no problem to judge how far away from
failure you are in a given set, this is not an easy task
for beginners. A useful strategy to solve this problem is to regularly
incorporate sets to failure (10 RPE sets) during the first months of
lifting. This allows beginners to quickly learn how to judge their
limits. But it also makes sense for more advanced lifters to incorporate
\"as many reps as possible\" sets regularly to gauge if their judgment
of the number of reps in reverse is correct.

In addition, it's important to take note that RPE can also be influenced
by other factors like interset rest periods and the order in which
exercises are done. For example, a set is perceived as harder if there
is just a short amount of time between sets. However, this is not the
kind of intensity that eventually leads to muscle growth. We will talk
about the importance of these factors later.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Now that we've established a scale that allows us to talk about
intensity, we should talk about the role of intensity for muscle growth.

Unfortunately, most studies on the role of \"intensity\" for muscle
growth actually compare the impact of high-load sets with a small number
of reps (high 1RM percentage) with low-load sets with a higher number of
reps (low 1RM percentage) if the RPE is equal[^27]. Typically an RPE of
10 (reps till failure) is chosen. We will discuss the findings of these
studies in the next section where we talk about the role of different
rep ranges and schemes.

While the research on the exact influence of different RPE values in
isolation is still spotty, the currently available studies seem to
suggest that there is also dose-response relationship between intensity
(as measured by RPE) and muscle growth. In particular, low effort (low
RPE) sets lead to less muscle growth than moderate effort sets[^28].
Moreover, maximum effort (RPE of 10) sets lead to more hypertrophy
although this effect is primarily visible for experienced lifters[^29]
and for low-load sets[^30]. This is completely in line with what we
would expect using common sense. All else being equal, the more effort
you put into your sets the greater will be your gains.

But as for the \"more volume = more hypertrophy\" rule, there are some
caveats here:

-   Training to failure increases the risk of injuries[^31]. This is
    particularly true for multi-joint compound lifts.

-   Training to failure is psychologically far more demanding and thus
    can affect program adherence negatively[^32].

-   Training to failure is physiologically more demanding and thus
    requires longer recovery times between sets and between workout
    sessions[^33].

Thus it makes sense for most lifters to incorporate sets till failure in
moderation (if at all). Almost exactly the same results are possible
with sets close to failure (8-9 RPE), while the downsides listed above
are drastically reduced[^34].

Beginners in particular shouldn't primarily focus on 10 RPE sets. On the
one hand, there is currently no clear evidence that beginners gain more
muscles from 10 RPE sets than from 8-9 RPE sets. One the
other hand, the injury risk is far higher for inexperienced lifters and
thus anything that potentially increases the injury risk should be
avoided. In addition, one of the most important tasks as a beginner is
to learn good motor patterns and this is much easier if you stay away
from failure.

## Rep Ranges and Rep Schemes {#sec:repschemes}
--------------------------

In the previous two sections, we have established that the total number
of hard sets is a key variable in optimizing muscle growth. An essential
question we need to answer next is: what's an effective, practical way
to accumulate a sufficiently large number of hard sets?

For the sake of argument, let's say you've prescribed yourself three
bench press sets at an intensity of 8 RPE. There is still a lot of room
for variation. Should you do 3 reps in each set, or maybe 6, or 10, or
20?[^35] And is it really a good idea to perform the same number of reps
in all three sets? Maybe a pyramid scheme like

10 reps  → 8  reps   → 6 reps

or an inverse pyramid scheme

6 reps  → 8  reps   → 10 reps

is more effective?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

First of all, let's talk about the role of the number of repetitions in
a given set.

Probably the most important fact is that as long as the number of
repetitions stays within a reasonable range (<30), the number of
repetitions doesn't matter for hypertrophy[^36]. Only if the load is too
low such that an extremely high number of reps is necessary to achieve
the desired RPE value, there is significantly less hypertrophy[^37].
This isn't too surprising because after ca. 40 reps, tiredness
becomes a limiting factor before your muscles come to their limits. In
other words, if the load is too low (and hence the number of reps too
high) you're doing endurance training and not resistance training.

But this doesn't mean that the rep range doesn't matter at all. Humans
aren't robots and something that works in the lab doesn't necessarily
work in the real world.[^38] In particular, there are practical
advantages and disadvantages of different rep ranges.

-   Low repetition (high load) sets lead to bigger strength gains[^39]
    although, as mentioned above, they produce similar hypertrophy.
    However, high load sets increase the risk of injuries, lead to more
    joint pain, are generally psychologically more demanding and thus
    can affect program adherence negatively[^40].

-   High repetition (low load) sets are a lot more uncomfortable for
    most people[^41]. In addition, they lead to more muscle damage and
    thus prolonged recovery times[^42].

So if you're primarily interested in hypertrophy, it makes sense to do
sets in a moderate rep range (6-12). This is exactly the \"hypertrophy
rep range\" that bodybuilders have used since ages. But as mentioned
above, from an objective point of view, there isn't such a thing as a
\"hypertrophy rep range\". It's just that sets with 6-12 reps are an
extremely convenient way to accumulate lots of volume.[^43]

With that said, it's important to take note that the exact number of
reps you should choose always depends on the exercise at hand. For
example, compound lifts (deadlifts, squads,...) require a lot of
energy per repetition. Hence it makes sense to use a smaller number of
reps for these exercises because otherwise you would be too tired
afterwards to perform other exercises. Analogously, it makes sense to
use a high number of reps for certain exercises like lateral raises
since it's otherwise almost impossible to keep a good exercise
form.[^44]

Moreover, it makes sense to include various rep ranges in a workout
plan. Although different rep ranges lead to similar hypertrophy, there
is evidence that the mechanism how this happens is not necessarily
always the same. Hence a large spectrum of rep ranges may
be better suited to generate a full training stimulus.[^45] In addition,
it can make sense to include a small number of low rep sets to benefit
from the enhanced strength gains that are generated this way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Next, let's discuss whether straight sets like 3 x 8 or pyramid
rep schemes are more optimal for hypertrophy.

Unfortunately, there is currently almost no dedicated research on the
role of different rep schemes. However, using the results discussed in
the previous sections it's possible to discuss the advantages and
disadvantages of different systems.

The goal of an effective rep scheme should be to maximize the number of
hard sets. From this perspective, it becomes immediately obvious that
the traditionally used constant load, straight set system:

70 kg x 8 → 70 kg x 8 →  70 kg x 8 

is not very effective. Since the same load and the same number of reps
are targeted in all sets, lifters typically only come in the final set
close to failure. In other words, in a constant load,
straight set system only the final set is a hard set and thus the
approach is not very suited to maximize the number of hard sets.
Straight sets with constant load are a good idea if you believe that
volume load is the key variable that drives muscle growth.[^46] But
since there are many studies that falsify the idea that volume load is
strongly predictive of muscle growth[^47], there is no reason to stick
to a rigid straight sets scheme.

The problems of a constant load, straight set scheme can be fixed by
dropping the constant load requirement:

70  kg x 8 → 65 kg  x 8 →  60  kg x 8 

This way it's possible to reach a sufficiently high RPE in all sets even
if the number of reps stays the same. Similarly, it's possible to
maximize the number of hard sets in a pyramid scheme:

60  kg x 12 → 65 kg  x 9 →  70  kg x 6

and inverted pyramid scheme

85  kg x 6 → 65 kg  x 8 →  60  kg x 10

by choosing the load (and thus the RPE) in each set appropriately. If
this is done, there is no reason to expect significant differences
between the schemes in terms of hypertrophy.

But the message to take away is not that it doesn't matter which rep
scheme you use. I personally find it much more enjoyable to perform 3
hard sets in an inverted pyramid scheme than in a straight set scheme.
The inverted pyramid scheme motivates me to go \"all in\" in all three
sets while I perceive three sets with an equal number of repetitions as
monotonous and boring. In an inverted pyramid scheme the first set is
the heaviest one in terms of weight on the bar. For example, when bench
pressing I use so much weight in the first set that I would be able to
lift it a maximum of 8 times. I then lift this weight 6 times which
means my first set is a 8 RPE set. For the second set I lower the weight
by ca. 10%. I'm able to lift this reduced weight at most 10 times.
Therefore, I lift it 8 times in the second set which therefore is again
an 8 RPE set. Afterwards, I reduce the weight once more by 10% and lift
it 10 times. The psychological advantage of this scheme are that the
highest weight is lifted in the first set and therefore there is no
reason to hold anything back for later sets. Moreover, since the weight
is lowered and the number of repetitions is increased in subsequent
sets, they feel like completely new challenges and are still enjoyable.

So, since from an objective point of view it probably doesn't make much
difference which rep scheme you use, you should experiment with all of
them to find out which one of them you find most enjoyable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In summary, you should use whatever rep range and rep scheme that allows
you to accumulate the highest number of hard sets.

## Variety and Frequency {#sec:varietyandfrequency}
---------------------

The next thing we need to discuss is the organization of workout volume.
How should a given volume be distributed among different exercises and
different workouts? Is it better to do, say, all 10 chest sets on the
same day or is it better to do 5 sets on one day and 5 sets on another
day? And does it make sense do 10 sets of bench press, or is it better
to distribute the sets to different exercises like chest flys?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Let's talk about exercise variety first.[^48]

There is quite some scientific evidence that it makes sense to have at
least some exercise variety in a workout plan[^49]. It has been shown
that a workout plan that distributes the same number of sets to
different exercises leads to a more balanced muscle development[^50].
This seems reasonable since it has been demonstrated that muscles can be
regionally targeted by different exercises[^51]. For example, incline
bench press sets lead to a larger stimulus of the upper parts of the
chest muscle than ordinary bench press sets.

But it certainly doesn't make much sense to distribute 10 sets to 10
different exercises. A balanced activation of a muscle group can be
achieved with much fewer exercises and it takes a lot of time to switch
exercises after each set. Moreover, for each exercise movement skill has
to be developed before it can be used to stimulate muscles
effectively[^52]. Thus if you include a too large range of exercises in
your workout plan, it will take a long time before you are sufficiently
skilled in all of the movements and this will delay your progress.

A reasonable general recommendation is to distribute the target volume
to 2-4 exercises per muscle group[^53].

Next, we need to discuss how workout volume should be distributed among
different workouts.

Firstly, it certainly doesn't make sense to cram the total volume for
all muscles into a single workout.[^54] In such a long workout tiredness
becomes a limiting factor before all muscles can be stimulated
adequately. Thus it's not surprising that larger muscle gains are
possible if the same volume is split into multiple workout
sessions.

But what about cramming the total weekly volume for one or two muscle
groups into a single workout?

Common sense suggests that it is probably beneficial to split the volume
for each muscle group into two or three workout sessions per week since
a too low intensity due to tiredness can be avoided this way. And this
is indeed what the studies that have been carried out so far tell
us[^55]. However, the effect is quite small. Therefore, the training
frequency should primarily be determined by personal preferences[^56].

I personally find it much easier to carry out 18 hard chest sets per
week if the volume is split into two sessions á 9 sets. But, for
example, if your gym is quite far away it can make sense to do all sets
in one session.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In summary, workout frequency is primarily a tool for reaching your
weekly target volume. If you find it easier to reach it for a given
muscle group in one session, this is what you should do. For many
people, two weekly sessions for each muscle group work great.[^57] If
possible, you shouldn't cram all sets for all muscles into a single
workout since in this case tiredness certainly becomes a limiting
factor. Moreover, it makes sense to distribute your total volume for
each muscle group among 2-4 different exercises to make sure your
muscles grow in a balanced way.

Rest Periods Between Workout Sessions and Sets {#sec:restperiods}
----------------------------------------------

An important aspect that becomes important if the weekly training
frequency is higher than one is the recovery time between workout
sessions that target the same muscle group. For example, if you decided
to split 18 total chest sets into two sessions á 9 sets, does it make
sense to do the first session on Monday and the second one on Tuesday?

Muscles typically need 48 hour or even longer to recover from a hard
workout session[^58]. This means, only after two or three days you will
typically be able to lift the same weight again. However, there is
currently no evidence that workouts on consecutive days affect
hypertrophy negatively[^59]. Thus it again becomes a matter of personal
preferences. I, like most people, prefer to do my workouts when my
muscles no longer feel sore and thus in my workout plans there are
typically two or three days between sessions that target the same muscle
group.[^60]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Now that we've talked about the (un)importance of rest periods between
different workout sessions, the obvious next questions is: what about
rest periods between different sets?

Short rest periods (\sim 30 seconds) certainly increase the perceived
effort of a workout session. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that
short rest periods lead to an increased hormonal response[^61] and more
muscle damage[^62]. But none of these factors is what we're primarily
after.

What we really care about in this book is muscle growth. And short rest
periods have no demonstrated advantage for hypertrophy. Instead,
although the effect is not very large, it's *longer* rest periods that
are linked to more muscle growth[^63]. One possible explanation is that
if the rest period between sets is too short, it's metabolic fatigue and
not mechanical tension that limits the number of reps[^64]. But
metabolic fatigue is not the primary driver of muscle growth and thus
you are possibly sabotaging yourself if the interset rest periods are
too short.[^65]

A sensible general recommendation is therefore to wait till you feel fit
for the next set which is typically after around 2 minutes. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In summary, the rest period between workout sessions should be chosen
according to personal preferences. Interset rest periods, on the other
hand, should be long enough to allow for a sufficient recovery for the
next set.

## Exercises Selection and Order {#sec:exerciseselection}
-----------------------------

Something we haven't discussed so far is to which exercises a given
workout volume should be distributed and how different exercises should
be ordered in a workout session. Are compound exercises like deadlifts
and squats more effective than isolation exercises? Are free weight
exercises better than machine exercises? And which exercises should be
done at the beginning and at the end of a workout session?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Let's start by talking about two broad categories: compound exercises
and isolation exercises.

A compound exercise involves multiple joints and muscle groups. Famous
examples are squats, deadlifts and pull ups. In contrast, an isolation
exercise involves just one joint and major muscle group. Famous examples
are dumbbell flys, lateral raises, and biceps curls.

The main argument in favor of compound exercises is that they allow us
to train multiple muscles at once and therefore lead to more
time-efficient workouts[^66]. For example, bench pressing not only
stimulates the chest but also the triceps and shoulder muscles.
Moreover, since multiple muscles are involved much heavier weights can
be moved in compound exercises.[^67] On the one hand, this is important
because it allows you to progress in small steps later in your journey,
whereas in isolation exercises no measurable progress would be possible.
On the other hand it's simply extremely motivating to be able to move a
lot of weight. Moreover, compound exercises produce larger increases in
hormone levels[^68].

But once more it's worth remembering that we are primarily interested in
hypertrophy and so far, there is no conclusive scientific evidence that
compound exercises lead to greater muscle size gains[^69]. However,
there is plenty of anecdotal evidence in favor of compound lifts. Almost
anyone really muscular uses compound lifts as a staple of their
workouts. This, of course, by no means proves that compound lifts are
essential. But it is a hint that it may be a good idea to include them
in your workout plans.

An important argument in favor of isolation exercises is that they're
easier to learn. Moreover, they can be useful for correcting muscle
imbalances[^70] and can be essential for muscles that aren't targeted
directly by compound movements.[^71] It is also worth recalling that a
variety of exercises might be necessary to develop a muscle fully and
isolation exercises can be a good way to get some variation into your
workout plans without making them too tiresome.[^72] Another advantage
of isolation exercises is that they allow for a better adaption to
anatomical differences. Since in compound lifts several muscles are at
work, chances are much higher that some lifters find them hurtful due to
anatomical differences in single muscle groups.

A sensible strategy is therefore to include both, compound exercises and
isolation exercises, whenever possible[^73].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Now that we've discussed these two broad exercise categories, it's time
to get a bit more specific. Which compound and isolation exercises
should be chosen for a given muscle group?

Unfortunately, the only existing data is once more rather indirect.

Many exercises have been compared by how much a given muscle gets
activated by them.[^74] However, a larger activation signal does not
necessarily mean that the exercise leads to more hypertrophy[^75]. This
becomes clear if we recall that low load sets can be just as effective
as high load sets although high load sets lead to much larger activation
signals.[^76]

Activation signal measurements are primarily useful to understand
*which* muscles get stimulated by a given exercise. For example, from
activation signal measurements we learn that pullovers activate the
chest just as much as the lat. We also learn from such
studies that the middle delts get a lot of stimulation from compound
lifts and therefore in many cases no additional isolation exercise is
necessary to develop them[@botton]. Moreover, activation measurements
can help us to understand which regions of a given muscle get
predominately activated by different exercises. A famous example is that
increasing the bench press incline leads to a greater activation of
higher regions of the chest muscle[^77]. This is important if we want to
make sure that a given muscle develops in a balanced way.

Another interesting aspect is that although isolation exercises can
activate muscles just as much as compound exercises, the activation
duration is much longer through compound exercises. But
again, this does not necessarily tells us anything about the resulting
hypertrophy. A final point worth mentioning is that activation signal
measurements demonstrate that individual factors can be quite important.
For some people the activation signals in certain exercises are much
larger than for others[@bok]. This suggests that an optimal exercise
selection depends on factors like the individual anatomy. We will
discuss individual exercises for different muscle groups in more detail
in Chapter .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Once we've picked exercises for each muscle group, we have to consider
in which order they should appear in our workout plan.

Intuitively, it makes sense to do compound exercises before isolation
exercises. For example, bench pressing requires effort from the chest
muscle and from the triceps. Therefore, if we fatigue the triceps using
an isolation exercise first, our bench press performance will suffer and
we won't be able to stimulate the chest muscle completely[^78]. This
idea is further supported by the observation that the hormonal response
is larger and the average perceived effort smaller if large muscles are
trained first[^79]. The second point is especially important because a
greater perceived effort can affect workout adherence negatively.[^80]
Moreover, compound exercises are more complex and have a higher injury
risk. Thus it makes sense to do them first when your concentration is at
a maximum and there is no general fatigue.

On the other hand, there is a popular argument that it makes sense to
pre-exhaust muscles using isolation exercises prior to compound
exercises (e.g. flys before bench press or leg extensions before
squats)[@jones]. For example, let's assume that the triceps is the
\"weak-link\" in our bench press sets although our goal is to stimulate
the chest muscle. Thus we pre-exhaust the chest muscle by doing, for
example, flys before the bench press sets to make sure it is stimulated
fully.

In a situation like this, it's worth remembering that our primary goal
is hypertrophy. From a scientific point of view, there is currently no
evidence that one of the two possible exercise orders (isolation →
compound, compound → isolation) leads to more muscle mass
gains[^81]. Most people, me included, prefer to do compound exercises
first. But this is mostly a matter of personal preferences and not an
axiomatic principle.

In particular, it's important to take note that in general, it's
possible to do more reps with exercises that are placed at the beginning
of the workout session[^82]. Thus it is hardly surprising that there is
some evidence that larger gains are possible for exercises that are done
early in a workout session[^83]. A general recommendation is therefore
to put exercises that have a high priority first. For example, if your
biceps is underdeveloped it can make sense to start your workout session
with bicep curls.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Let's summarize the main takeaways from this section.

-   It makes sense to distribute the weekly volume to isolation *and*
    compound exercises. Both types of exercises can be equally effective
    in stimulating hypertrophy but have advantages in different areas.
    Isolation exercises can be helpful to develop muscles in a more
    balanced way while avoiding too much general fatigue. Compound
    exercises are more time-efficient and psychologically motivating.

-   Specific exercises should be chosen primarily based on personal
    preferences and equipment availability. However, it is important to
    choose complementary exercises such that all muscles are stimulated
    in a balanced way.

-   Although an inverted exercise order (isolation → compound) can
    be as effective in stimulating hypertrophy as a normal order
    (compound → isolation), most experienced lifters prefer normal
    ordered workout sessions. An important factor for this preference is
    that normal ordered workouts are perceived as less hard even if the
    volume is equal.

## Lifting Tempo and Form {#sec:liftingtempoandform}
----------------------

Now that we've picked exercises and ordered them, it's time to discuss
*how* they should be done for maximum hypertrophy.

Even on this \"microscopic level\" there is still quite some room for
variation. Does it make sense to cheat a little in order to be able to
move more weight? Or should exercises always be done with good form? And
will it lead to greater muscle gains if exercises are done extra slowly?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

First of all, there is convincing evidence that a full range of motion
leads to more hypertrophy[^84]. Therefore, exercises should be done with
the full range of motion that is possible given your anatomy.

![image](images/muscle/5.png){width="80%"}

While it may look badass if you're able to move more weight by cheating
a little, always remember that this is, I suppose, not your primary
goal. You're not going to the gym to move weights from A to B, but to
build muscles. And if your goal is hypertrophy, you're sabotaging
yourself by doing half-reps.

Secondly, good form is important to prevent injuries and can help that
the target muscle gets fully activated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Next, it's important to take note that good form with a full range of
motion does not necessarily mean slow lifting speed. Experienced lifters
can maintain a good form and go through the full range of motion while
lifting the weight quite explosively.

Now it's a popular argument that a slower lifting tempo increases the
time under tension and hence leads to more muscle growth. On the other
hand, it's a fact that with a slower lifting speed less weight can be
moved and less reps are possible[^85]. Moreover, slow repetitions lead
to smaller muscle activation signals and a lower blood lactate
response[^86]. So, from this perspective it also seems possible that a
purposefully slow lifting speed affects hypertrophy negatively.

As usual it's possible to invent stories in favor of both sides and
without scientific evidence people could argue all day long without
getting anywhere. So what do scientific studies tell us about the role
of lifting tempo?

In short, there is currently no convincing evidence that lifting tempo
has a meaningful impact on hypertrophy. Only if the tempo
becomes ridiculously slow (around 10 seconds per rep), hypertrophy seems
to be affected negatively. Moreover, there is some evidence that
purposefully explosive repetitions lead to larger strength
gains.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In summary, you should make sure that you perform all exercises with
good form and the full range of motion that is possible for you. In
addition, you shouldn't worry about lifting tempo. Just get the weight
up and down in a controlled manner without purposefully slowing it down
or up.

## Summary
-------

The most important message in this chapter is that there are many roads
to hypertrophy. This is great news because it implies that you can
certainly design a plan that fits your personal preferences and is
effective.

On the other hand, the existence of a multitude of possibilities can be
quite confusing. Therefore, we talked in detail about the most important
variables that are commonly used to write down workout plans.

-   Volume corresponds to the number of hard sets per muscle group and
    week. There is a dose-response relationship between muscle growth
    and volume. While muscle growth is stimulated for beginners already
    at a relatively low volume (4 sets), faster progress is possible
    with a higher volume (around 10 sets). However, beyond a certain
    limit an increase in the number of hard sets becomes
    counterproductive.

-   Intensity is measured by your rating of perceived exertion. While
    especially for beginners it's not necessary to train to failure (10
    RPE), the intensity should be sufficiently high (7-9 RPE) to make
    sure your sets stimulate muscle growth.

-   Frequency describes how often you train each muscle group per week.
    While for beginners one workout per muscle group and week can
    already be sufficient, at a more advanced level a higher frequency
    (2-3) is necessary to accommodate all of the volume. We also
    discussed that it makes sense to distribute the volume not only to
    different workout days but also to different exercises. Some variety
    in the exercise selection is necessary to stimulate balanced muscle
    growth.

-   An interset rest period is the time you wait between two sets. A
    sensible recommendation is to wait until you feel recovered for the
    next set (1-3 minutes) since rushing through the sets can be
    counterproductive. Moreover, we discussed that while it has no
    direct impact on hypertrophy, most lifters prefer to wait 1-3 days
    until they train the same muscle again.

-   A key distinction when it comes to exercise selection is between
    compound exercises and isolation exercises. By definition, compound
    exercises stimulate multiple muscles at once, while an isolation
    exercises stimulates almost exclusively one muscle. A well-balanced
    and time-efficient workout typically contains isolation and compound
    exercises. The ordering of the exercises has no significant impact
    on hypertrophy but most lifters prefer to start their workouts with
    the more challenging compound exercises. Another sensible
    recommendation is to put exercises that target muscles you want to
    focus on at the beginning of a workout session.

-   Lastly, we discussed how exercises should be done to stimulate
    muscles in an optimal way. One key factor is to always go through
    the full range of motion that is possible given your anatomy. By
    doing half-reps you're sabotaging your progress. In addition, good
    exercise form is important to avoid injuries and other unwanted side
    effects. The lifting tempo, on the other hand, has no meaningful
    impact on hypertrophy. Therefore, exercises should be performed in a
    tempo that is neither purposefully slow nor purposefully fast, and
    allows you to move the weight in a controlled way.

A solid understanding of these key variables is essential because it
allows you to focus on what really matters and not get lost in
unnecessary details. On the other hand, it is important to always keep
in mind that the primary reason why you should care about these
variables is that they allow you to keep yourself accountable. Without
well-defined workout variables it's far too easy to get a bit lazy. And
while there are many roads to hypertrophy, they all have in common that
they require serious effort.

If you want to transform your body you have to push your boundaries
regularly. Of course, you shouldn't push them all the time as this is
not sustainable and can lead to unwanted side effects. It's perfectly
fine to dance around the boundaries. But if you always stay within your
comfort zone, you'll never make progress.

However, it's important to keep in mind that more suffering not
necessarily leads to more gains. Your efforts must be targeted in a
productive way. For example, workouts are perceived as harder if
interset rest periods are short although this doesn't lead to more
hypertrophy. As in all other aspects of live, there is an important
difference between being busy and being productive. Productive effort in
the gym is primarily measured by volume times intensity
