---
layout: post
title: Basic Principles of Effective Weightlifting
permalink: weightlifting-principles
---


In this article, we'll discuss a few key principles that are essential
for your success in the gym. They represent the pillars on which all
further details discussed in this series rest upon.

Since there are lots of details and nuances, it's easy to feel
overwhelmed. So whenever in doubt, you should come back to the
principles discussed in this article.

## Consistency is Key
------------------

First and foremost, it's essential to understand that you absolutely
need a workout plan. Many beginners make the mistake of choosing
exercises and weights at random. That's a horrible strategy.

As a beginner you'll have no intuition about what is working and what
isn't.[^9] For example, on many days, you'll feel a bit tired and thus
perform only a few light exercises. But if you do this, you'll never
learn that it's actually heavy exercises that will help you overcome
your tiredness. Just as it takes time to develop healthy eating habits,
it takes time to develop healthy lifting habits. By using a workout plan
you can make sure that you send the optimal signals to your muscles
every week.

But the most important reason why you need a workout plan is that it
allows you to track and plan your progress. Only by tracking and
planning your progress you can hope to *make* real progress.

Once you've decided on a plan, you have to stick to it.[^10] The most
common mistake among beginners who use a workout plan is that they
constantly switch between different plans. Program hopping is almost as
bad as using no plan at all since it's impossible to track your progress
if you constantly switch plans. Moreover, pfaffing about with different
programs usually makes people forget to put in the work.

At the very least, you should use the same plan for several months
before you switch to another plan. And you should only switch your plan
if you have a good reason for doing so. It's easily possible to make
amazing progress by sticking to the same plan for years.[^11]

Moreover, even if you switch plans you should be somewhat consistent
with the exercises you include. Every time you include a new exercise in
your workout plan, your body has to learn a new sequence of movements.
While you do this, you won't be able to send optimal \"growth signals\"
to your muscles since you're busy learning new movements. In other
words, your time learning new movements could be better spend moving
heavy weights.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

So far, we've discussed that it's essential to be consistent on a
\"microscopic\" scale. But consistency is also important on a more
\"macroscopic\" level.

You not only have to be consistent once you're in the gym but also in
your habit of going to the gym.

This is the most important contributing factor to your success. You can
almost forget about anything else; if you go to the gym on a regular
basis (to lift weights and not to chat or go to the sauna) you will make
good progress. Consistency is where most people fail. Everyone is
enthusiastic at the beginning. But only those who go the gym regularly
have a real chance of reaching their goals.

This implies that your workout plan must be fun and compatible with
everything else you've going on in your life.

-   If you need to force yourself to go to the gym, it's almost certain
    that you'll eventually quit.

-   If you're fighting every week to free up enough gym time, it's
    likely that your other obligations will at some point gain the upper
    hand.

Optimizing for consistency is far more important then optimizing in any
other dimension.

-   To give an example, maybe your gym is a thirty minutes' drive away.
    In that case, two longer workouts per week are certainly a better
    fit for you than four short workouts. To optimize for consistency
    you should therefore choose a plan that involves a small number of
    longer workouts even if the plan involving shorter workouts would be
    better for muscle growth from a scientific point of view.

-   Or maybe your gym only owns one exemplar of a particular popular
    piece of equipment. As a result, there is always a long queue and
    therefore, you would have to wait ten minutes or longer every time
    before you can start using it. In that case, a plan that doesn't
    require this piece of equipment would be a better fit for you even
    if, from a scientific point of view, the most optimal exercise would
    require it.

-   Or maybe you're really short on time. In that case it doesn't make
    sense for you to use a \"scientifically optimal\" plan that involves
    four ninety minutes workouts every week. A better fit would be a
    less optimal plan that consists of just two thirty minute sessions
    every week. Sure, your progress will be a bit slower but since at
    the same time your chances of long term success are much higher this
    is a small price to pay.

-   Or maybe, you dread leg exercises. In that case, it can make sense
    to use a plan without them even if it certainly isn't optimal to use
    such a plan. A non-optimal workout is far better than no workout at
    all.

In all of these cases, the message to take away is that a plan that is
perfect for *you* is far better than a plan that is better from an
objective point of view. A perfect workout plan is useless if you cannot
stick to it.

So, ask yourself[^12]

-   How often can I realistically go to the gym every week?

-   What gym equipment is readily available during the times I'm there?

-   What kind of exercises do I truly enjoy doing?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Once you've found a workout plan that fits your needs, you have to make
sure that working out becomes a habit. If you have to decide every time
whether or not you'll go the gym, you're doomed to fail. But new healthy
habits usually don't form automatically. You have to actively develop
them. While effective strategies to develop new habits are a huge topic
in their own right[^13], the most important factor for your workout
habit is relatively simple: every week you have to go to the gym at the
same days at the same time. Only if you do this, going to the gym can
cease to be a decisions that requires willpower.

Of course, it's not impossible to succeed without fixed workout times.
But it makes things much harder. If you decide spontaneously whether or
not to go to the gym, chances are high that you'll eventually stopped
going there.

Working out has become a habit once you feel like something is missing
if you miss a single workout. Eventually, the gym will become a place
you look forward going to. It will become the place you long for
whenever you feel a bit down, because you know that you'll leave it
feeling better.

If you're just starting out this surely sounds a bit strange. During the
first few weeks there will be quite a few days where you simply don't
feel like working out. It's essential to break through these invisible
walls of resistance to keep your routine going. Only this way you can
learn that workouts do not subtract but add to your energy level. This
is something everyone has to experience for themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In summary, consistency is the key to your success on a \"macroscopic\"
and on a \"microscopic\" level:

-   You have to work out regularly.

-   You have to stick to a workout plan.

With this in mind, we discussed two key elements of an effective workout
plan: it has to be realistic and fun. In the following two sections we
will continue this discussion by introducing two additional key
principles.

## There is no Progress without Planning and Tracking


A key element of all effective workout plans is a well-defined
progression system. There are lots of different progression systems and
we will discuss some of them in the next chapter. In this section,
however, I simply want to emphasize that you need a clear plan of how
you modify the load, or number of reps from one workout to the next if
you want to keep getting bigger. Your workout plan has to include a
system that allows you to exceed your old values and establish higher
ones. If you simply trust your gut feeling for hard enough workouts, you
will eventually get complacent and not overload enough.

To make progress it's essential to generate a sufficiently large
training stimulus. However, what was once a stimulating signal will bore
your muscles after a while since your body adapts. That's how resistance
training works after all. To adapt to a certain kind of signal your
muscles grow. To grow them further, you need to send stronger and
stronger signals. A progression system allows you to systematically
modify workout variables from workout to workout or from cycle to cycle
to make sure the training stimulus stays large enough.[^14] That's why a
progression system is so important if you want to make steady progress.

A corollary of this observation is that you need to keep track of your
lifts. Whether you use an old-fashioned notebook or an app doesn't
matter as long as you keep track of every set, every workout. A
progression system can only work if you write down how much weight you
lifted during each set and how many repetitions you were able to
perform.

In your training log you can see at any time how much weight you used in
each exercise during previous workouts. Using this information alone you
determine how much weight you put on the bar in the next workout.

In summary, you need a workout plan that includes a progression system
and a constantly updated training log since they keep you accountable
and motivated in the long run. Without a progressive workout plan and a
training log, chances are high that you'll quit after a few months. It's
simply impossible to stay motivated without a clear sense of progress.

An immensely important final aspect if you track your progress is that
you should always compare yourself to one person only: yourself.
Genetics play such an important role for muscle and strength
gains but also for your body composition in
general. Hence it simply doesn't make sense
to compare yourself to other people unless, of course, you want to make
yourself unhappy.

## Stick to the Fundamentals


Once you go down the fitness rabbit hole you'll confronted with an
almost infinite amount of different alternatives. There are thousands of
exercises, hundreds of set-repetition schemes and dozens of progression
systems. How can you decide from this incredibly rich menu what to
choose?

The short answer is, if in doubt, always stick to the fundamentals. As
the classic analogy goes, if you want to \"fill your cup to the brim\",
get your big rocks in place before your pebbles, and your pebbles in
place before your sand. In my experience, the most common reason lifters
aren't getting to where they want to be is that they focus on the wrong
things; they can't differentiate between big rocks, pebbles, and sand.
Moreover, often the things that are least important are the most
confusing.

We will discuss in the next chapter in detail which workout variables
are truly big rocks and which are merely sand.

There is, of course, a lot of fancy stuff you could try. You can find
hundreds of websites and books promoting revolutionary new exercises and
magic workout schemes. But none of this stuff is as thoroughly tested as
the fundamentals. The fundamentals have worked for thousands of people
all around the world and will certainly work for you too.

Even if there are alternatives that may work slightly better, it's
simply not worth the risk. Let's use some totally made up numbers to
illustrate this point. The fundamentals will give you 95% of the maximum
possible results with 99.9% certainty. In contrast, some fancy
alternative routine might have a chance of giving you 99% of the maximum
possible results. However, the probability that this really happens is
maybe only 10%.

Moreover, once you've nailed the fundamentals you can still experiment
with alternative stuff. For example, after you've finished your bench
press sets you can try the alternative chest exercise that you read
about. The fundamentals, however, should always remain the backbone of
your workouts. In particular, instead of focusing on minor details like
lifting tempo, just make sure that you go to the gym regularly and do a
sufficiently large number of hard sets.

Another advantage if you focuses on the fundamentals is that it allows
you to avoid analysis paralysis. Many books and coaches confront
beginners with tons of complicated materials. They present effective
bodybuilding as some complicated task akin to rocket science. This
naturally scares anyone with little to no experience. As a result, many
guys become convinced that they're not making progress because they
haven't understood something crucial. What then typically follows is a
phase of program hopping which prevents any real progress. So, rest
assured that the opposite is true. Effective bodybuilding is not
complicated. There are just a few fundamentals you absolutely must
understand and from there on execution becomes everything. You can spend
weeks researching the best instructions on the bench press technique,
but you only build strength if you actively start lifting weights.

In summary, to succeed you have to focus on the things that really
matter. Most people who regularly go to the gym but never make visible
progress, fail because they dilute their focus and effort. To avoid this
mistake, just stick to the fundamentals. If you want to try more
experimental stuff, only do it once you're finished with all the
fundamentally important things.

**Notes**

[^9]: For experienced lifters it can be a sensible strategy to make
    certain decisions intuitively. But even in these cases, all
    intuitive decisions take place within the framework of a predefined
    plan.

[^10]: Of course, you should, if possible, use a *good* workout plan.
    But a bad plan is still better than no plan at all. We will talk
    about workout plans in more detail below.

[^11]: As we will discuss below, the key factor that determines whether
    or not you make progress is a well-defined progression system.

[^12]: We'll discuss the nuances of building and choosing a workout plan
    below.

[^13]: A fantastic book solely dedicated to habits is Atomic Habits by James Clear.

[^14]: For more advanced lifters it's no longer possible to progress on
    a weekly basis and more long-term planning is necessary. We will
    discuss the importance of workout cycles below.
