---
layout: post
title: Basics of Effective Program Building
permalink: program-building
---


In this second part of this article series, we discuss several specific workout
plans. As should be clear from the discussion in the previous part,
there is not a single plan that is optimal plan from an objective point
of view. At the most, there is a plan that optimally fits *your*
preferences, circumstances and goals.

You should therefore use the following plans primarily as a source of
inspiration. Quite likely a few adjustments are necessary before one of
them exactly fits your needs. In particular, feel free to swap any
exercise for a sensible alternative that better fits your anatomy and
the equipment availability at your gym.

Before we take a look at the plans, we should discuss program building
in a bit more general terms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The first variable we always need to determine is the weekly volume for
each muscle group.

-   As discussed in SectionÂ [3.1](#sec:volume){reference-type="ref"
    reference="sec:volume"}, a sensible recommendation for beginners is
    to start with $4-10$ sets per muscle group and week.

-   At an intermediate level, it's typically possible to benefit from a
    slightly higher volume. Thus it makes sense to increase the volume
    to $13-15$ sets per muscle group and week.

The next essential decisions is on the number of workout sessions per
week. Moreover, we need to decide how often we want to stimulate each
muscle group each week. At a beginner and intermediate level it usually
makes sense to distribute the weekly volume to 2-4 sessions and
stimulate each muscle group once or twice a week.

Based on these decisions, we can start to think about whether the weekly
plan should consists of full body workout sessions or of sessions that
focus on specific body parts.

-   If you decided on two weekly workout sessions and want to stimulate
    each muscle group twice, your only option are two full body workout
    sessions.

-   If you decided on three weekly workout sessions and want to
    stimulate each muscle group twice, you can do, for example, one
    session that focuses on the upper body, one that focuses on the
    lower body and one full body workout session.

-   If you decided on three weekly workout sessions and (to save time)
    want to stimulate each muscle group once, you can do, for example,
    one session that focuses on the chest plus triceps, one that focuses
    on the back and biceps and one that focuses on the lower body.

-   If you're able to go the gym four times a week, it typically makes
    sense to target each muscle group twice by doing two upper body
    sessions and two lower body sessions.

Afterwards, we need to choose specific exercises for each muscle group.
A sensible general recommendation is
to include one or two compound exercises per muscle group and distribute
the remaining volume to 1-3 isolation exercises. The following table
lists the most important movement patterns plus the muscle groups they
target.

{:.centered}
![](/images/muscle/exercises.png)

![image](/images/muscle/11.png){: width="600px"}

Once we've chosen exercises that should be included in the plan we need
to assign a specific number of sets to each of them. Moreover, we need
to decide on a rep range and rep scheme for each exercise. These
decisions are primarily a matter of personal preference and have no
direct impact on hypertrophy. Nevertheless, these are important
decisions because they have a major impact on how much fun you'll have
in the gym.

Take note that it makes sense to have some variety in your workout plan.
For example, if you've decided on an upper-lower split and four weekly
sessions, you could do two completely different upper and lower body
workouts throughout the week. This allows you to avoid monotony and to
make sure that your muscles grow in a balanced way. In particular you
can not only do different exercises but also use different rep ranges
and switch the order of the targeted muscle groups. For example, many
lifters find it particularly motivating to have two strength focused
sessions (i.e. low rep range, high load) early in the week and two
hypertrophy focused sessions (higher rep ranges, lower load) at the end
of the week. Moreover, to ensure equal development it makes sense to
include unilateral exercises (e.g. dumbbell curls) and bilateral
exercises (e.g. barbell curls) in your workout routine.

A final aspect we need to think about is the progression system. A linear progression works perfectly for beginners and happens automatically if you use RPE to measure
intensity. At the intermediate level, however, a bit more planning is
necessary. A good place to start with more advanced progression schemes
is Linear Periodization and Double Periodization.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

With all this in mind it's finally time to have a look at several
explicit examples.

In the following sections, we'll discuss three sample programs. The
first one involves a volume that is only slightly above the minimum
effective volume. Hence it's an ideal routine to get started as a
beginner because it requires little time commitment but will be
effective nevertheless.

The second routine is more optimal from a scientific point of view and
involves significantly more sets per week. It makes sense to switch to a
plan like this once you've developed a gym habit and feel like you could
do more.

The third routine is an example of how your plan could look like once
you've reached an intermediate level and contains an even further
increased volume. However, as discussed above, the most important change
at the intermediate level is that you need to switch to a more complex
progression scheme.

While studying the plans keep in mind that you should use them primarily
as a source of inspiration. Feel free to modify them. Moreover, if
you're unsure how to do a certain exercise or which alternative
exercises you could do, a great free resource you can consult is
[www.exrx.net](www.exrx.net). Alternatively, you can find great free
tutorials by searching for the exercise name on Youtube. Another
fantastic but somewhat pricey resource is the [3D Muscle Journey Lifting
Library](www.3dmjvault.com/courses/lifting-library).