---
layout: post
title: Taking a Scientific Approach to Muscle Training
permalink: scientific
---



There is probably no topic where it is so common that people
overcomplicate things to profit like bodybuilding.

  - Magazines want to convince you that you need to try this brand new
    exercise if you want to maximize your gains,

  - Youtube and Instagram influencers regularly come up with new premium
    workout plans that, they promise, will finally help you look like
    them, and

  - professional bodybuilders repeat over and over again that you
    absolute need this special Supplement™ if
    you want to have a realistic chance to reach your goals.

The fitness industry is full of charlatans and overcomplicators.

Even most well-meaning advice is highly misleading. If someone lifts
weights for years, it’s quite likely that he’ll make some gains. But
this doesn’t mean that his approach is optimal. Taking 4 years to
get where you should have been in 1 year is not a good place to be
sharing advice from. Similarly, someone who takes steroids can do almost
anything wrong and will still make greater gains than all natural
lifters. And even if a steroid user trains optimally, they usually don’t
realize that their recommendations are only maximally effective for
other steroid users.

Recommendations based on personal experiences and anecdotal evidence
should always be taken with a grain of salt.

A much smarter approach is to have a look at the actual scientific
evidence. While this approach isn’t perfect it’s certainly better than
the alternative of just making stuff up.[^1]

The main reason why a scientific approach to weightlifting isn’t more
widely adopted is that usually the only people who talk about scientific
evidence are experts. While this may sound like a good thing it usually
isn’t. Experts often have a hard time seeing the forest for the trees
and suffer from the curse of knowledge. They usually can’t remember what
it’s like to be a beginner and endlessly discuss nuances that aren’t
really relevant for beginners.

So here’s some good news. This book was not written by a professional
bodybuilder, influencer or leading expert. I’m an average guy and I
don’t make my living in the fitness industry.

This is a huge advantage for several reasons.

  - There’s no reason why I should overcomplicate things and
    purposefully confuse you to make you dependent.[^2] This book will
    teach you everything I know since I have nothing else to sell.
    There’s no premium video course, private coaching, or other
    upsells.

  - I’m not sponsored by any company in the fitness industry and thus
    I’ve no reason to promote useless supplements or equipment.

  - Since I don’t have any expert status that I could lose, I can afford
    to be non-dogmatic, to discuss topics in simple and understandable
    terms, and to sometimes say "I don’t know". In contrast, experts
    (and academics in particular) usually write terribly because they
    write for an audience out to destroy them. They are terrified to
    make a mistake. And texts that are 100\% bulletproof are in most
    cases unreadable.

With that said, I should clarify a few points.

First of all, I’m not claiming any originality. Everything discussed in
the following chapters is well known to experts in the field. Instead,
my value proposition is distillation, organization and synthesis.

Secondly, even though the recommendations in this book largely follow
the general consensus in the scientific community, you shouldn’t trust
them blindly. It’s always a smart idea to be skeptical of arguments from
authority. Thus whenever a claim is made in the following chapters, I’ve
always included direct references to the relevant studies so that you
can check the data yourself. Moreover, to help you with this I’ve
included a chapter on common fallacies that are often made by people who
try to evaluate scientific evidence.

Thirdly and most importantly, this book is certainty not a good fit for
everyone. It focuses solely on the fundamentals of weightlifting that
are important if your primary goal is to build bigger muscles and if you
are currently a novice or at an intermediate level. I’m convinced that a
narrow focus is important because even most great books try to do too
much at once. They discuss beginner, intermediate, and advanced
strategies and evaluate various options depending on different primary
goals (muscle gains, strength gains, etc.).[^3] This makes it hard to
find those lessons that are directly relevant for you.

So, if after all these disclaimers, you still think that this book might
be a good fit for you, without any further ado, let’s dive in. 

**Notes**

[^1]  With some practice, it’s quite easy to invent a convincing story
    that supports any point you want to make. We will talk about several
    examples in Section [3](#ch:basichandles).

[^2]  Books are often used primarily to demonstrate expertise. This works
    best if the book is hard to understand since this shows how smart
    the author is. In other words, most books are written for the author
    not the reader. The strategy is that people just give up and say:
    "okay fine, you know your stuff and I’m confused, just tell me what
    to do."

[^3]  While muscle gains, cardiovascular health, athleticism, functional
    fitness, and strength gains are not necessarily mutually exclusive,
    it’s simply impossible to optimize in various directions at once.
    There’s always a trade-off. Thus you need to decide what your
    primary focus is. And if it isn’t muscle gains, you’re probably
    better off by reading a different book. For example, if you
    primarily want to get really strong, you should read a book on
    powerlifting. Or if you want to prioritize functional fitness, it
    probably makes more sense if you sign up for some functional fitness
    course at your local gym.