---
layout: post
title: Progression Systems for Sustainable Muscle Growth
permalink: progression
---


In the previous articles, we have discussed the key variables that allow
you to design an effective workout plan. What we haven't talked about so
far is how these variables should be adjusted over time. Muscles need a
reason to grow bigger and bigger. Therefore there must be some element
of progression in your long term workout planning. For example, if you
always do 3 times 10 reps of bench press with exactly the same load
(and nothing else), you'll certainly stagnate.

But is it more effective to increase the weight on the bar? Or should
you do more sets? And when exactly should you modify a workout variable?

The answers to these questions depend crucially on your training level.
While for beginners a simple linear progression scheme works perfectly,
at an intermediate and advanced level more sophisticated approaches
become necessary to make further progress. This is the case because it's
increasingly hard to make progress the closer you get to your genetic
limits. Moreover, progress not only will be harder to achieve but also
slower. Hence, it's necessary to use progression schemes
that take these facts into account.

{:.centered}
![](images/muscle/6.png){: width="400px" }

You might wonder how you can determine whether you're at a beginner,
intermediate, or advanced level. From a practical point of view it makes
a lot of sense to define these categories depending on how fast you're
able to make measurable progress. ([^87])

-   Beginners are (on average) able to make progress from workout to
    workout.

-   Someone at an intermediate level is (on average) able to make
    progress from week to week.

-   Someone at an advanced level is able (on average) to make progress
    from month to month.

By using these definitions it becomes obvious that different progression
schemes are necessary at different levels and thus we will use it in the
following. After all, the primary reason why we introduce these
categories is to be able to determine which kind of progression scheme
should be used.

Other definitions based on muscle size, strength benchmarks or years of
experience are far less suited for this goal. The size of your muscles
and how fast they grow depends heavily on genetic factors ([^88]).
Therefore it's impossible to make any general statements about how large
your muscles should be at an intermediate or advanced level. Similarly,
strength standards can be misleading because some people are stronger
simply for genetic reasons ([@pmid15947721]). Years of experience is an
even worse measure of the training level. Some people have years of
experience in the gym but are still at a beginner or intermediate level
since they haven't trained intelligently. In particular, without a
well-defined progression system it's easily possible to stagnate for
years.

With that said, here are some very rough numbers that you might find
helpful.

-   If you work out intelligently, you will quite likely reach an
    intermediate level after 6-24 months. However, you should be aware
    that there are genetic outliers that are able to make linear
    progress for far longer.

-   Typical 1RM values at an intermediate level are ([^89])

    -   Bench press: body weight x 1.2

    -   Chin-ups: body weight x 1.2

    -   Squat: body weight x 1.6

    -   Deadlift: body weight x 2

-   An advanced level is typically reached after 2-5 years of
    intelligent training.

-   Typical 1RM values at an advanced level are

    -   Bench press: body weight x 1.5

    -   Chin-ups: body weight x 1.5

    -   Squat: body weight x 2

    -   Deadlift: body weight x 2.5

After this lengthy prelude, let's finally talk about progression systems
in more detail.

## Progression at a Beginner Level

Luckily, if you're a beginner or at an intermediate level and focus on
the right key variables (number of hard sets, RPE), progression is not
rocket science. ([^90])

In particular, if you're using RPE as measure of intensity, variables
like the number of reps and the load will automatically evolve. For
simplicity, let's say your workout plan contains 3 bench press sets at
an RPE of 8. Moreover, you determined that straight sets with 8 reps
work best for you. Here's how progression happens automatically.

-   In the first workout, you do your sets with 50 kg, 45 kg, 40 kg
    since you tested that this allows you to be at an RPE of 8 after 8
    reps.

-   In the second workout, you increase the load to 52.5 kg, 47.5 kg,
    42.5 kg such that you're again at an RPE of 8 after 8 reps.

-   A workout afterwards, you increase the load again to 55 kg, 50 kg,
    45 kg respectively but then notice that you're not able to do 8 reps
    in all sets.

-   Hence you try 55 kg, 50 kg, 45 kg in the workout afterwards again.
    If you are now successfully able to do 3 sets á 8 reps, you increase
    the weight again in the following workout.

So, if you use a workout plan that contains fixed repetition numbers and
RPE values, you have to increase the load regularly. If you wouldn't
increase the load, you would be able to do more reps or would finish
your sets at a lower RPE. This is a perfectly valid progression system
for beginners known as **Linear Progression**.

You could, of course, also simply do more reps while keeping the load
constant. However, eventually you will be at 25 reps and therefore
forced to increase the load for logistical reasons. Moreover, for most
people it's far more motivating to increase the load than to increase
the number of reps.

In any case, you certainly won't be able to supersede your previous
results every workout. But as a beginner, you will typically make
measurable progress every other workout. As long as this is possible,
you should stick to Linear Progression and keep your workout plan
otherwise unchanged.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

What exactly should you do if you're not making further progress?

Before you move on to more sophisticated progression schemes, you should
try to make further progress by improving your exercise form. One of the
most common reason for stagnation are **technique issues**. The easiest
way to fix them is to get help from a coach. If this isn't an option,
you can record your sets and review them yourself ([^91]) or post them
online for feedback ([^92]).

If this doesn't help, you should try a **deload**. A deload is typically
a week in which you reduce the volume and intensity to allow your body
to recover. Accumulated fatigue is another common reason for stagnation.
A sensible general recommendation is to do only half of the usual
volume. For example, if your workout plan contains 10 bench press sets,
you do only five during a deload week. Moreover, it makes sense to
reduce the load such that you're 2-3 points below your usual RPE after
the prescribed number of reps. ([^93]) In many cases, you will find that
after the deload you're again able to make progress.

Take note that a deload phase is not a workout pause. Instead, you still
go to the gym and lift weight to make sure that you stay above your
maintenance volume ([^94]). This makes sense to avoid a loss of
gains ([@pmid21131862]). At the same time you give your body time to repair
accumulated muscle damages and fatigue. Additionally, and maybe most
importantly, a deload is an extremely powerful psychological tool to
renew motivation and determination.

The following table shows an exemplary workout log for one specific
exercise.

{:.centered}
![](/images/muscle/loaddecision.png){: width="600px" }

In most cases, working on your technique or deloading should be
sufficient to overcome a phase of stagnation. But if you're after a
deload still not able to make progress in multiple exercises, it's time
to move on to a more sophisticated progressions scheme.

A final thing worth mentioning before we move on is that there are
various more complicated progression schemes that are sometimes
recommended for beginners. However, there is currently no scientific
evidence that they lead to greater gains ([^95]). It therefore makes sense
to stick to Linear Progression as long as it is possible to make
progress this way.

## Progression at an Intermediate Level

At an intermediate level it's no longer possible to make progress from
workout to workout. Hence a bit more planning is necessary to make sure
that all muscles still get progressively overloaded and therefore grow
further.

The four most popular intermediate-level progression schemes are

-   Linear Perodization,

-   Double Perodization,

-   Undulating Periodization,

-   Block Periodization.

What all these schemes have in common, as their name already suggest, is
that they focus on periodization. By periodization we usually mean a
systematic strategy to vary workout variables like volume or intensity
on the scale of microcycles, mesocycles and macrocycles.

Admittedly, I've just explained jargon by introducing even more jargon.
But the notions microcycles, mesocycles and macrocycles are used so
frequently in periodization discussions that it makes sense to introduce
them here. In short:

-   a microcycle is typically a week,

-   a mesocycle is typically a month or two, and

-   a macrocycle is typically a year or a season.

![image])(images/muscle/7.png){width="80%"}

Before we discuss any details, it's worth mentioning that there is
plenty of evidence that periodization, in general, leads to greater
strength gains than nonperiodized alternatives for trained lifters ([^96]).
Moreover, take note that historically there have been many heated
discussions on the question which periodization scheme works best. But
this question cannot be conclusively answered since there are too many
possible variation how each scheme can be implemented ([^97]). Currently
there is no convincing evidence that one of the periodization schemes is
superior for hypertrophy ([^98]). In fact, they are not even mutually
exclusive. It's possible to implement Undulating Periodization at the
microcycle scale, Linear Periodization on the mesocycle scale for
compound exercises, Double Periodization on the mesocycle scale for
isolation exercises, and Block Periodization on the macrocycle scale.
This is known as an **integrated approach** ([^99]). However, such
elaborated systems only become really relevant once you've moved past
the intermediate level.

In short, as long as you have a sensible system to generate progressive
overload, the details don't seem to matter a lot. Therefore, I will
focus in the following on Linear Periodization and Double Periodization
which are arguably the simplest of the four alternatives and perfectly
suited for intermediate level lifters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Linear Periodization is a great way to make progress in compound lifts
at an intermediate level. The idea behind linear periodization is that
you increase the load while decreasing the number of reps. After
increasing the load while decreasing the number of reps in two
subsequent workout sessions, you do a deload. After the deload you're
usually able to increase the load you can do the target number of reps
with.

![image])(images/muscle/8.png){: width="80%"}

The best way to understand Linear Periodization is by looking at an
explicit example. As before, let's say your plan contains three bench
press sets at an RPE of 8. Moreover, you determined that straight sets
with 8 reps work best for you.

-   In the first workout, you do your sets with 80 kg, 75 kg, 70 kg
    since you tested that this allows you to be at an RPE of 8 after 8
    reps.

-   In the second workout, you increase the load to 82.5 kg, 77.5 kg,
    72.5 kg and stop in each set after 7 reps.

-   In the third workout, you increase the load again to 85 kg, 80 kg,
    75 kg and now stop in each set after 6 reps.

-   In the fourth workout you decrease the load and volume to deload. In
    our example here, you could do 2 sets with 80 kg, 75 kg respectively
    á 6 reps.

-   In the fifth workout, a new mesocycle starts and you now do your
    three 8 rep sets with 82.5 kg, 77.5 kg, 72.5 kg.

{:.centered}
![](/images/muscle/loaddecision2.png){: width="600px" }

While Linear Periodization can be used for years to make progress in
compound lifts, it's not directly applicable to isolation exercises.
Since much lighter loads are moved in isolation exercises it's simply
not possible to add more weight on such a regular basis. Instead, Double
Periodization is much better suited for this task and thus we'll discuss
it next.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The idea behind Double Periodization is that we focus on increasing two
variables (number of reps and load) but only increase the second
variable (load) once we've hit the target in the first variable (number
of reps).

{:.centered}
![image])(images/muscle/9.png){: width="80%"}

Again, the best way to understand this idea is by considering an
example. Let's say your workout plan contains three sets of biceps curls
á 12 reps at an RPE of 8.

-   In the first workout, you do your sets with 15 kg since you tested
    that this allows you to be at an RPE of 8 after 12 reps.

-   In the second workout, you keep the load unchanged but try to do
    more reps.

-   You do this in every workout until you're able to do 3 $\times$ 15
    reps.

-   Once this goal is reached you finally increase the load to 16 kg and
    start again with three sets á 12 reps.

-   Afterwards you again start to increase the number of reps until
    you've reached 15 reps in each set.

Additionally, it can often make sense to include a deload before you
increase the load or if your progress starts to stagnate. For example,
if you're able to do 14,14,13 reps in one week and only 14,14,14 reps in
the week afterwards, this can be a sign that your body needs a deload.

Moreover, depending on what kind of equipment is available in your gym,
it can make sense to use a wider rep range. For example, if you're only
able to increase the bicep curl load in increments of 2.5 kg, it can
make sense to work your way up to 3 $\times$ 18 reps before you increase
the load. You'll notice that this is necessary if you're not able to do
the target number of reps (here 3 $\times$ 12) after increasing the
load.

{:.centered}
![](/images/muscle/loaddecision3.png){: width="600px" }

## Alternative Progression Systems

I've already mentioned above that there are two popular alternatives to
the periodization systems discussed in the previous section. In this
section I want to sketch quickly how they work.

**Undulating Periodization** is a system where the load an number of
reps are modified in a wavelike pattern.

![image])(images/muscle/10.png){width="80%"}

Once more, let's consider an example.

-   In the first workout, you do your sets with 80 kg since you tested
    that this allows you to be at an RPE of 8 after 8 reps.

-   In the second workout, you increase the load to 85 and stop in each
    set after 6 reps.

-   In the third workout, you decrease the load again to 82.5 and now
    stop in each set after 7 reps.

-   In the fourth workout, you increase the load once more to 87.5 and
    now stop in each set after 6 reps.

-   In the fifth workout you increase the load and volume to deload. In
    our example here, you could do 2 sets with 80 kg á 6 reps.

-   In the sixth workout, a new mesocycle starts and you now do three 8
    rep sets with 82.5 kg.

{:.centered}
![](/images/muscle/loaddecision4.png){: width="600px" }

It's possible to modify the load and number of reps on a weekly basis,
which is known as Weekly Undulating Periodization, but also on a daily
basis, which is known as Daily Undulating Periodization.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In contrast, **Block Periodization** is primarily a tool for long-term
planning. Typically a block corresponds to a mesocycle (4-6 weeks) and
focuses on a specific goal like strength or hypertrophy. block

-   During a hypertrophy block the volume is typically increase from
    week to week (e.g., 10 sets $\to$ 20 sets per muscle group), while
    each set is stopped before failure (RPE of 6-8) and consists of 6-15
    reps.

-   During a strength block the volume is reduced again (e.g. to 10 sets
    per muscle group), while the intensity is increased (RPE of 9-10)
    and the number of reps per set lowered to 2-10, depending on the
    exercise.

-   Afterwards, typically a deload and testing block follows. During the
    deload week the volume is reduced further (e.g. to 8 sets per muscle
    group) and the intensity is reduced again (6-8 RPE). The testing
    block is then used to determine the new status quo and consists of
    One-Rep Max tests and 10 RPE sets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In summary, while Undulating Periodization can be a useful alternative
to Linear Periodization even for lifters on an intermediate level, Block
Periodization is a tool that is used primarily at an advanced level and
beyond.

## Volume Progression 

The primary reason why it makes sense to implement a progression system
is that it allows you to make sure that your muscles get  even after
months of training  progressively overloaded. In the previous sections
we've discussed how progressive overload can be achieved by manipulating
the workout variables intensity, load, and number of reps
systematically.

But there is one additional key variable we haven't systematically
varied so far: volume. ([^100]) So, how and when should you increase the
workout volume? ([^101])

We discussed in Section [3.1])(#sec:volume){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:volume"} that the total workout volume primarily
determines how quickly you are making progress. If time is not a
limiting factor, it usually makes sense to choose the maximum volume you
can sustainably recover from. As a rule of thumb, your volume is too
high if you're still sore from the previous week's workouts.

With this in mind it becomes clear that usually there simply isn't any
room to vary the workout volume except for temporary decreases. If
you're already doing the maximum sustainable volume, it doesn't make
sense to increase it to generate a greater training stimulus. Of course,
it is possible to temporary increase the volume beyond a sustainable
limit in the context of block periodization. However, this really only
something advanced lifters should try.

But this doesn't mean that volume remains constant throughout your whole
lifting career. The maximum sustainable workout volume increases as you
gain more experience. ([^102]) While for beginners 10 sets per muscle group
and week are a good general recommendation, lifters with more experience
can benefit from up to 30 sets per muscle group and week ([@pmid30153194]).

However, the only way to sensibly adjust your volume over time is
through experimentation. In the beginning, it makes sense to follow a
general recommendation like 10 sets per muscle group and week. Then, as
soon as you feel like you could do more, you should try it. It makes
sense to start by adding 1-2 sets per muscle group and week. You should
test the increased volume for at least 2 weeks before making a decision.
If you're still recovering well, keep the increased volume until you
feel again like you could do more.

This method of increasing the volume is known as **autoregulation**. The
general idea is completely analogous to how we choose the load by using
the RPE scale.

And in fact, learning to autoregulate your workouts may be most
important long-term success factor. Without much experience this is far
from easy and therefore some general recommendation are necessary in the
beginning. But eventually you'll learn to recognize when you're doing
too much or too little. So, the earlier you start listening to your body
the better.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In summary, at a beginner or intermediate level an autoregulated linear
volume progression scheme works perfectly well. Only at an advanced
level and beyond it usually makes sense to periodize the workout volume
in more sophisticated ways.

## Summary
-------

In summary, if you challenge yourself on a regular basis, your boundaries will
shift. What was once a challenge will eventually become easy. Therefore,
we discussed how the various handles can be modified over time if you
want to continue making progress.

-   As a beginner it's makes perfect sense to use linear progression. If
    you use a workout plan that includes a fixed number of sets and reps
    at a fixed RPE, you will progressively overload your muscle by
    increasing the load. Once this is no longer possible, you should try
    to identify problems in your exercise form and a deload. Only if
    these two tactics fail, it makes sense to move on to more
    complicated progression schemes.

-   At an intermediate level, Linear Periodization and Double
    Periodization are great strategies to continue making progress.
    Linear Periodization is based on the idea that you increase the load
    from workout to workout but at the same time decrease the number of
    reps. After typically three weeks and a deload, you increase both,
    the number of reps and the load compared to what you started with.
    This strategy works particularly great for compound exercises. For
    isolation exercises Double Periodization often makes more sense.
    Here you increase the number of reps instead of the load from
    workout to workout until a certain target is reached. Only once this
    target is reached you increase the load and start again to work your
    way up to the target number of reps.

-   A useful alternative to Linear Peridization is Undulation
    Periodization. Here the key idea is to alternate between increases
    and decreases in the number of reps and load.

In the next part of the book, we will discuss several example workout
plans. This will allow you to understand how the learnings from this
first part of the book can be applied to the real world.